Title: Spontaneous perspective-taking toward multi-view robots: Evidence supporting the social agent model
Time:2025, Shanghai, China
Conference: Annual Conference on Industrial Psychology and New Productivity
Author: Xucong Hu, Mowei Shen, Jifan Zhou
Abstract: As industrial intelligence continues to advance, intelligent systems, such as industrial robots, are increasingly involved in collaborative production. Enhancing the efficiency of human-robot cooperation has thus become crucial. The smooth progress of collaboration depends on the accurate inference of others' intentions, with perspective-taking being a key process in this regard. There has been a large body of research on spontaneous perspective-taking in humans, yet the question of whether humans can take the perspective of robots remains debated. The "human model" perspective suggests that humans engage in perspective-taking by adopting another's point of view. Therefore, perspective-taking can only occur when robots share similar functions with humans. In situations where there is a significant functional disparity between robots and humans (e.g., multi-headed robots that can simultaneously look in multiple directions), humans are unable to adopt the robot's perspective. In contrast, the "social agent model" argues that as long as robots possess the ability to perceive and act, and there is a causal relationship between the two, humans will treat robots as intentional social agents. In this case, perspective-taking can occur even if the robot's functionality differs from that of humans. We tested these perspectives through five experiments and found that when there is a causal relationship between perception and action, observers are capable of adopting the perspective of multi-headed robots. Conversely, when the causal relationship was disrupted through various methods, the perspective-taking effect towards robots disappeared. These results strongly support the "social agent model" and offer new insights for designing intelligent robots that enhance human-robot collaboration efficiency.
